Frequency Configuration for Low-Power Wide-Area Networks in a Heartbeat
Akshay Gadre1
, Revathy Narayanan1,2
, Anh Luong1
, Anthony Rowe1
, Bob Iannucci1
, Swarun Kumar1
1Carnegie Mellon University, 2
IIT Madras
Abstract
Low-power Wide-Area Networks (LP-WANs) are seen
as a leading candidate to network the Internet-of-Things
at city-scale. Yet, the battery life and performance of LPWAN devices varies greatly based on their operating frequency. In multipath-rich urban environments, received signal power varies rapidly with a low-power transmitter’s frequency, impacting its transmission time, data rate and battery
life. However, the low bandwidth of LP-WANs means that
there are hundreds of operating frequencies to choose from.
Among them, we show how choosing a select few of these
frequencies(≤3.55%) effectively triples the battery life when
compared to the rest for LP-WAN devices.
This paper presents Chime, a system enabling LP-WAN
base stations to identify an optimal frequency of operation
after the client sends one packet at one frequency. Chime
achieves this by analyzing the wireless channels of this packet
across many base stations to disentangle multipath and ascertain an optimal frequency that maximizes client battery
life and minimizes interference. We implement Chime on
a campus-scale test-bed and achieve a median gain of 3.4
dB in SINR leading to a median increase in battery life of
230% (∼1.4-5.7 years), data rate by 3.3× and reduction in
interference of 2.8× over commodity LP-WANs.
1 Introduction
Recent years have seen the emergence of Low-Power WideArea Networks (LP-WANs) as a promising technology to connect the Internet of Things. LP-WAN technologies ( like LoRaWAN [2], SIGFOX [61], 3GPP’s NB-IoT [35], LTE-M [5])
allow devices to send data at low data rate (few kbps) to base
stations several miles away powered by batteries with targeted
lifetimes of 5-10 years. However, recent studies [17, 19, 28]
show a contrasting reality in dense urban deployments where
LP-WAN clients deep inside buildings experience significantly lower battery lives (∼1-2 yrs) owing to heavy signal
attenuation. They further show that over 97% of the energy
consumption in an LP-WAN client can be directly attributed
to its radio front-end.
While many parameters influence the battery-drain from
a client’s radio front-end, the main parameter that it can control is its operating frequency. With the opening up of the
TV whitespaces, narrowband LP-WAN clients have several
hundreds of operating frequencies to choose from [16]. While
there is rich work on spectrum sensing, particularly to avoid
interference, in Wi-Fi [24] and LTE [38], LP-WANs differ in
an important way: base stations span asymmetrically higher
bandwidth compared to clients. This means that base stations
can directly monitor multiple frequency bands and advise
clients on frequencies with minimal interference. Yet, base
stations are unaware of the precise signal power at which an
LP-WAN client’s signal will be received across frequencies.
Our extensive experiments (Sec. 3) over a wide-area campus testbed show a promising opportunity in this respect: We
show how, when set to a select few frequencies (≤ 3.55% of
all available frequencies), signals from an LP-WAN client
are received at much higher signal power (∼3-4 dB) at base
stations. This increases client data-rate (∼2-8 ×) and reduces
their transmission time, effectively tripling their battery life1
relative to the median frequency. Unfortunately, finding these
optimal frequencies is challenging because they correlate
poorly by interpolating measurements along space, time or
frequency of operation. Further, simply sifting through even
a few frequencies (e.g. as with Wi-Fi [11]) in the hope of
finding the optimal ones would itself drain the battery inordinately.
This paper presents Chime, a solution that explores the
feasibility of offloading the LP-WAN client frequency configuration problem to the more well-equipped LP-WAN base
stations. Chime considers static clients (e.g. sensors) in urban
environments whose multipath characteristics, while complex,
change relatively slowly over time. Chime uses the fact that
while a single base station cannot ascertain the complex multipath, multiple spatially-distributed LP-WAN base stations
1Battery Life estimates derived from prior energy models (see Sec.3)
can collaboratively identify an optimal operating frequency
for a client based on a single association packet it transmits
when it wakes up, regardless of its initial operating frequency.
Such an association packet is a standard feature of many LPWAN protocols [51] posing minimal power overhead for the
LP-WAN client. Chime achieves this by building a novel system that uses the wireless channel-state information of this
packet at one frequency received across multiple base stations
to disentangle the multipath and predict the long-term battery
drain for the different operating frequencies. Further, Chime
also predicts the extent of unwanted interference the client
produces at base stations across different frequencies. Thus,
Chime passively infers an optimal client operating frequency,
without prior calibration of the environment or known client
location.
Chime exploits the recent trend of massive and unplanned
deployment of LP-WAN base stations [32]. For instance, LoRaWAN base stations are proposed to be deployed in Comcast
MachineQ set-top boxes [32, 36], meaning that many LPWAN base stations will likely be single-antenna and often deployed indoors. Chime proposes a novel algorithm (see Sec. 5)
to synchronize these multiple single or multi-antenna LPWAN base stations to emulate a large city-scale distributed
antenna array. In particular, Chime builds on past work in the
cellular context (e.g. R2-F2 [50]) that separates signal paths
using multi-antenna arrays while dealing with new challenges
pertaining to distributed, irregular arrays of antennas and lowpower user devices. Chime first models the received signals
from a client across synchronized base stations to disentangle
the different paths that the signals may traverse as they reflect off different objects. These signals combine to reinforce
or cancel each other leading to varying signal power across
the operating frequencies of the client. Chime then estimates
how these separated signal components recombine at different
client frequencies to find the one maximizing battery-life and
throughput, while minimizing interference.
A key challenge in estimating the multipath in urban environments is receiving time-synchronized phase measurements across multiple LP-WAN base stations to emulate a
distributed MIMO array. While recent work has successfully
demonstrated distributed MIMO for WiFi [22] and cellular
networks [40], LP-WAN packets last over 10× longer and
therefore require much more accurate and long-lasting phase
synchronization. Further, low-power devices experience large
hardware imperfections meaning that the phase of the wireless channel varies drastically even within one packet. Hence,
any phase measurements made over time across base stations
would simply appear unsynchronized and random. Chime
overcomes this challenge by never measuring the phase of
a low-power client in isolation, instead always measuring it
relative to a high-power master base station whose signal
propagation characteristics we know a priori. We design this
master base station’s signal so that it can be measured at exactly the same time and frequency as the low-power client,
without significantly interfering with it. Sec. 5 describes this
novel algorithm that directly compensates for phase drifts
over time of the low-power client relative to a reference signal
due to hardware imperfections.
Next, Chime must use the synchronized phase measurements of a client’s association packet to infer how the signal
propagates through environment. However, inferring all paths
of the signals using measurements from a few single-antenna
base stations [53] that are geographically separated is challenging. Chime exploits the fact that though wireless signals
in urban wide-area networks traverse diverse paths to base
stations at different locations, they often share a very small
number of common large reflectors (e.g. buildings, trees, big
vehicles, etc.). Our approach aims to discover these dominant
reflectors in the environment using the small number of wireless channel measurements and model the signal propagation
(Sec. 6), while accounting for variations in the size, shape and
orientation of these reflectors. Chime recombines signals in
these dominant paths across frequencies to accurately predict
an optimal frequency of operation for improved throughput
and lower interference ( Sec. 7).
Limitations and Scope: We emphasize that Chime: (1) Considers static LP-WAN clients (e.g. sensors, metering devices);
(2) Models macroscopic environmental changes but neglects
fleeting reflectors (trade-offs discussed in Sec. 6.2) (3) Assumes LP-WAN clients send an association packet to base
station upon waking up. Yet, Chime remains broadly applicable to most sensor networking deployments.
Evaluation and Results: We deploy Chime using LoRa as
the low power technology and Semtech SX1276 chips as the
client RF transceivers. Our base-stations are USRP N210s deployed on six buildings in a 0.7 km × 0.5 km area surrounding
a university campus. Our results show that:
• Chime provides a net increase in battery-life of 1.4-5.7 years
(230%) achieving at an average 79% of the optimum.
• Chime can increase network throughput by 3.3× compared
to commodity LoRa.
• Chime can reduce interference from LP-WAN clients at base
stations by 2.1 dB, by predicting the weakest frequency.
Contributions: Our specific contributions include:
• A wide-area motivation study that demonstrates the inability
of spectral, temporal and spatial interpolation for identifying
an optimal operating frequency of an LP-WAN client.
• A novel solution for collaboratively identifying an optimal
operating frequency of an LP-WAN client at the base stations
using only one transmitted packet from the client.
• A system that demonstrates significant increase in battery
life and throughput by identifying an optimal frequency of
operation for LP-WAN radios while accounting for multipath,
interference and noise.
• A wide-area deployment across a university campus showing
1.4-5.7 years of increased battery-life for LP-WAN clients.
2 Related Work
Related work can be broadly categorized as follows:
Low-Power Wide-Area Networks: Recent years have witnessed much interest in LP-WANs on both cellular (LTEM [5] and NB-IoT [35]) and unlicensed spectrum (Semtech’s
LoRa [2,27,44] and SigFox [39,61]), with some proposals extending to the TV whitespaces [20]. Recent work on LP-WAN
has explored interference management [19, 23], developing
battery-free solutions [30,45] and system deployments on the
whitespaces [48] to name a few. Chime complements this past
work by considering rapid frequency configuration, a problem
crucial for tackling with rapidly changing channel quality in
urban spaces and improving battery-life.
Spectrum sensing: Cognitive radio and spectrum sensing
solutions are primarily aimed at identifying vacant frequency
bands to minimize interference with other users [56]. Many
of these solutions rely on long-term statistics of channel occupancy and signal power using temporal [9, 15, 29, 60] and
spatial correlation [12,14,46,59] to make predictions. More recent work attempts to minimize feedback by relying on sparse
recovery techniques such as compressed sensing [34, 43, 55]
or eigen-value based methods [8, 57].
For LP-WANs, channel occupancy, interference and noise
can be directly inferred by the base stations because they span
much larger bandwidth [10] compared to clients. Further, past
work on spectrum sensing does not focus on predicting received signal power at the base station from a client across
frequencies. This is precisely Chime’s goal based on measurements at one frequency from a single client radio.
Optimal radio configuration: Perhaps the solutions most
closely related to this paper are systems in the Wi-Fi [41]
and cellular context [50]. CSpy [41] exploits the properties
of OFDM wide-band transmissions from Wi-Fi client on one
Wi-Fi frequency band to accurately model wireless channels
at other Wi-Fi frequency bands. R2-F2 [50] predicts both
channel magnitude and phase of LTE cellular signals based
on measurements in one frequency, exploiting the properties
of OFDM and large multi-antenna base stations.
In contrast the LP-WAN context brings three unique challenges to the problem of finding an optimal operating frequency. First, there are too many frequencies to choose from
across whitespaces (∼800MHz of bandwidth). For example,
just running through all of them will consume about 6% of
the client’s battery life2
. Second, these radio configurations
demonstrate extremely poor correlation across frequency, time
and space, ruling out statistical techniques to estimate the optimal frequency of operation (see large-scale study in Sec. 3).
Finally, the vast majority of LP-WAN base stations are singleantenna [36] and often deployed indoors, ruling out past work
that exploits bulky and expensive multi-antenna array infrastructure [7, 50]. Indeed, while Chime builds on R2-F2 [50],
2Available Battery Energy: 2900mAh; 125kHz channels in 800MHz:
6400; Energy of a typical LoRa packet: 100 mAs ; Battery spent = 6.13%
analyzing multipath across distributed single-antenna base
stations for frequency configuration in the LP-WAN context
is its key contribution.
3 Motivation - Empirical Study
To motivate the battery-saving opportunities in finding an
optimal frequency configuration and the core-challenges in
finding it, we present our findings from a detailed empirical study. We focus on a simple question: “Can an optimal
frequency of operation of an LP-WAN client be found by
exploiting prior measurements made over time, frequency or
space?”. We deploy 20 LoRaWAN clients at multiple locations periodically sending packets across a month iterating
over 160 frequency configurations in an outdoor campus-scale
testbed (see Sec. 9 for a detailed description of our testbed).
Each client was static and placed in a weather-proof case
in indoor and outdoor locations with signal power measured
from a single base station. While we do not consider mobile
clients, we consider varying outdoor environments over time
to measure channel quality and estimated battery life for each
frequency.
Estimating battery life: Prior studies have shown that the RF
front-end is responsible for most of the battery consumption
of a LoRaWAN device [17]. We use these prior LoRaWAN
battery models [17] to estimate the energy consumed per
packet at different datarates. We then use operational characteristics for the Semtech SX1276 transceiver [4] to map the
signal-to-interference plus noise ratio (SINR) to the appropriate datarates. They show that improving signal strength from
a LoRaWAN client can reduce the transmission time, thus
increasing battery-life. The reason the battery life increases
so much with a few dB improvement in SINR is that, unlike
WiFi, every better data rate in LP-WANs halves the packet
transmission time [4]. Thus, across the SINR thresholds of
these data rates, your client battery life doubles, quadruples
and so on. Our results show high variation in the RSSI of a
LoRa client at base stations across time, frequency and space.
Correlation across time: Upon investigating the data across
clients to the base station, we discover that most frequencies
change in signal strength even across a few minutes (Fig. 2).
Our results (Fig. 3) show that using historical measurements
over different time spans on a set of frequencies to predict the
optimal one (via polynomial interpolation) achieves 38.27%
of the optimum at best. Our detailed study of urban multipath
in Sec. 10.2 shows that this stems from gradual aggregate
change in reflectors in the environment at these timescales.
Correlation across Frequency: Our results reveal that the
optimal frequency-of-operation is extremely difficult to stumble upon with a random guess or even predict using a modest
amount of frequency hopping. As shown in Fig. 1, 50% of all
operating frequencies provide just 27.58% of optimum battery life while 90% of them still provide only 67.09% of the
optimum. Indeed, only 1.58% of the operating frequencies are
Figure 1: Percentile of battery life: few frequencies have good SINRs providing battery lives close
to the optimum
Figure 2: Channel Variance: Channel quality varies dynamically across
days and even minutes
Figure 3: Interpolation: percentile
of battery life of the optimum frequency from interpolation
at 90% of the optimum while only 3.55% triple the median
battery life. Further, sampling several frequencies in hope of
finding the top 3.55% would itself incur battery-drain, zeroing
out the benefits. We observe that even adjacent transmission
frequencies perceive a difference of about 20 dB of signal
strength which, in outdoor environments, is enough to make
a LoRa device undetectable. We further evaluate whether
polynomial interpolation from sampling a limited number
of frequencies sufficiently improves battery life and observe
(Fig. 3) that it achieves at best 70.07% of the optimum.
Correlation across Space: We evaluate whether measurements from neighboring clients can be leveraged to find an
optimal frequency of operation for a client. We consider various number of clients placed in a linear array spaced at 15
cm and predict an optimal frequency of the client in the middle via polynomial interpolation. As shown in Fig. 3, this
achieves at best 39.90% of the optimum battery life.
4 Overview of Chime
This section provides an overview of Chime’s approach and
challenges. Chime’s primary goal is to accurately measure an
optimal operating frequency for an LP-WAN client by making
it transmit only one packet on one frequency band. It primarily
aims to predict the received signal power of the client across
all frequencies at base stations. Since base stations span a
wide bandwidth, they can readily measure channel occupancy
and noise levels across frequencies, leaving received signal
power from a client as the primary unknown.
Chime’s system architecture is designed as follows: Upon
waking up and for signal association, each LP-WAN device
transmits a beacon packet on its arbitrarily chosen initial frequency of operation (a standard feature of common LP-WAN
protocols). Chime then processes the received signals from
this packet across the base stations at the cloud via a wired
backhaul to infer an optimal frequency of operation. Note
that since the powered base stations and the cloud perform
all computation, this does not impact client battery life. The
nearest base station then reports the estimated frequency to
the client in its acknowledgment of the beacon.
Figure 4: Chime: Frequency configuration for LP-WANs
Assumptions: While Chime does not consider mobile clients,
we do consider dynamic outdoor environments. While Chime
does not model fleeting reflectors in environment, it models
long-term changes in multipath as it re-analyzes the current
multipath based on transmissions from the client beacon and
the master base station.
The rest of this paper describes three challenges in achieving the above design: (1) Synchronizing Distributed Base
Stations: Chime first develops a synchronization system that
allows multiple base stations to coordinate. In doing so, it
eliminates the time-varying and long-lasting phase errors due
to hardware impediments, such as frequency, timing and phase
offsets of low-cost and low-power wireless hardware (see
Sec. 5). (2) Disentangling Signal Paths: Next, Chime analyzes the root cause of why signal power from the client would
vary across frequencies in the first place – wireless multipath.
Specifically, signals from the client traverse multiple paths as
they reflect off buildings, trees and other objects before reaching the base stations. Signals along these paths can reinforce
each other or cancel each other, depending on the frequency
of operation. At the cloud, Chime combines measurements
from the distributed array of base stations to decouple the
different paths the signal traversed from the client, even if the
geometry of these base stations is arbitrary and the environment is multipath-rich (see Sec. 6). (3) Estimating Optimal
Frequency: Chime then recombines the signal components at
all possible operating frequencies to determine their expected
signal power across base stations. Chime can then use this
information, along with the known interference and ambient noise at these frequencies perceived at base stations to
determine the best frequency-of-operation (see Sec. 7).
5 Synchronizing Base Stations
In this section, we describe our approach to synchronize
transmissions from the LP-WAN client between spatially
distributed base stations. Recall that Chime relies on synchronized phase measured across different base stations from
a single client device to extract signal multipath. However,
these phase measurements experience time-varying errors owing to the hardware imperfections of LP-WAN radios. Four
distinct hardware impediments contribute to these phase errors: (1) Carrier Frequency offset (CFO): occurs due to subtle
differences between the carrier frequency that any two radios
operate on; (2) Sampling Frequency offset (SFO): occurs due
to small differences between the sampling rate of the two
radios; (3) Detection Delay: is produced because the packet
from the client is detected with different delays across base
stations; (4) Phase Lock Loop (PLL): produces an arbitrary
constant phase offset at each base station’s received signal,
every time it tunes to a frequency. Chime’s synchronization
algorithm seeks to process these wireless channels across
base stations to eliminate these phase errors.
Let the measured channel between the client and the base
station be denoted by h˜
C→B1 whose phase is θ˜
C→B1
. Mathematically, we can write the phase of the measured wireless
channel θ˜
C→B1
at time t as a function of the phase of the true
channel θC→B1
between them, as well as various phase errors.
Let us define the following hardware impediments: (1) Carrier
Frequency Offset (CFO): fC − fB1
as the difference in carrier
frequency between the client and base station. (2) Detection
Delay and Sampling Frequency Offset (SFO): tC −tB1
denote
the effective offset in time owing to detection delay at the
base station and sampling frequency offset. (3) Phase offset
from the PLL: φC −φB1
the phase error owing to the PLL of
the client and base station locking to different values each
time these radios start receiving at a center frequency. The
phase of the channel at time t is:
θ˜
C→B1 = θC→B1 −(2π(fC − fB1
)t
+2π fC(tC −tB1
) + (φC −φB1
)) (1)
The rest of this section describes our approach to eliminate
each of the above errors across base stations.
5.1 Eliminating Phase Errors
To eliminate phase errors in Eqn. 1, Chime leverages multiple
base stations. Specifically, we recall that a client’s transmission at time t can be recorded by multiple base stations, which
can measure the corresponding wireless channels. Chime
eliminates hardware impediments by exploiting the common
phase shifts they induce to these channels.
Mathematically, Chime estimates the wireless channel at a
second base station B2 from the same client at the same time
t. This wireless channel is written as:
θ˜
C→B2 = θC→B2 −(2π(fC − fB2
)t
+2π f(tC −tB2
) + (φC −φB2
)) (2)
By subtracting Eqn. 1 and Eqn. 2 above, we get:
θ˜
C→B2 −θ˜
C→B1 = θC→B2 −θC→B1
+2π(fB2−fB1
)t +2π f(tB2 −tB1
) + (φB2 −φB1
) (3)
Note that the above difference in phases is independent
of hardware impediments owing to the client, i.e. its center
frequency fC, time-delay tC or initial phase φC. However, as
it is dependent on the impediments of the two base stations,
Chime still needs to estimate the phase errors due to hardware
differences between pairs of spatially distributed base stations.
To estimate these phase differences, Chime relies on a master base station (BM, one of the base stations) at a known
location. The master sends a signal at the same time t and frequency fC as the client (we address the challenges in achieving this without causing collisions in Sec. 5.2). We then measure the difference in phase at the two base stations of the
channel from the master base station:
θ˜
BM→B2 −θ˜
BM→B1 = θBM→B2 −θBM→B1
+2π(fB2−fB1
)t +2π f(tB2 −tB1
) + (φB2 −φB1
) (4)
Notice that Eqn. 3 and Eqn. 4 have the same effect of hardware impediments on their right-hand side. By subtracting
these two phase values, we obtain a quantity independent of
hardware offsets:
θ˜
C→B2 −θ˜
C→B1 −θ˜
BM→B2 +θ˜
BM→B1
= θC→B2 −θC→B1 −θBM→B2 +θBM→B1
(5)
The above quantity is independent of hardware offsets of
the client and base stations and therefore directly captures
the multiple signal paths along which the signal traverses.
Assuming the channel between master base station and other
base stations can be computed (described in Sec. 5.2) at the
same time and frequency as the client, the term θBM→B1 −
θBM→B2
can be compensated for. Chime therefore estimates
the following product of channels h
conj
12 – a complex number
we call the offset-free channel whose phase value is exactly
θC→B2 − θC→B1
– a function purely of the client and base
stations (note: (.)
∗
is the complex conjugate).
h
conj
12 =
h˜
C→B2
(h˜
C→B1
)
∗h˜
BM→B1
hBM→B2
h˜
BM→B2
hBM→B1
(6)
Chime can then use this offset-free channel, which is free of
all time-varying phase offsets, to disentangle signal paths from
the client, without being impacted by hardware impediments
(Sec. 6). Note that while the phase of a single offset-free
channel is ambiguous due wrapping of phase over 2π, we
combine the information across multiple such channels to
estimate the multipath. This approach resembles that of many
phase-based localization systems [26, 49, 54].
Figure 5: Wireless channels between client and base stations
5.2 Removing offsets between base stations
To obtain offset-free channels as in Eqn. 6 above, the base
stations need to measure channels from the master base station at the same time and frequency as the client that is being
tracked . However, doing so would result in collision between
the master base station packet and client packet, causing neither of their packets to be decoded. As a result, one needs to
carefully design transmissions of master base station to avoid
collision with the client transmissions.
A naive approach would be to transmit the master’s signal
a short time interval prior to every client’s transmission. By
picking an extremely short interval between the reference
and client, one can neglect the additional phase drift that
may accumulate. While this approach is commonly used in
distributed MIMO in Wi-Fi [33] and cellular [42], it does not
apply to LP-WANs. This is because LP-WAN packets span
hundreds of milliseconds [2, 13, 21]. Such long packets cause
phase measurements to drift significantly within a packet
rendering a priori synchronization futile. Thus, Chime needs
a mechanism to estimate phase measurements at the same
exact time and frequency from both reference and client by
analyzing their packets transmitted concurrently.
Chime circumvents this challenge by designating one of
the base stations to transmit a concurrent signal on an adjacent frequency band relative to the client. This master base
station transmits its signal at the same time as the client, sending a known sequence in parallel with its transmission. The
base stations can thus estimate the wireless channels of both
the master and client transmissions at the same time, albeit
across adjacent frequency bands. Chime then extrapolates the
wireless channels of both the master and client to estimate
its phase value at the guard band between them. While prior
works [42,58] have used beacon-based synchronization mechanisms, Chime uses piece-wise cubic spline extrapolation of
both the magnitude and phase of the wireless channels across
these bands for the master base station and client to estimate
the magnitude and phase at the guard band in-between. Given
that these estimates occur at the same time and frequency (i.e.
the guard band) across both the master and client, we can now
use them in Eqn. 6 to accurately synchronize base stations
and eliminate the effect of hardware imperfections.
When does the master base station transmit? To facilitate
the master base station to decode the preamble and transmit
simultaneously on an adjacent channel, Chime ensures that
the association packet’s preamble is sufficiently long to accommodate this. An alternative option in the cellular context
(e.g. NB-IoT) is to allocate dedicated spectrum for the base
station alongside the client’s association packet.
Why does interpolation work? Interpolation across frequency to estimate the channel seems to have inherent contradiction with our motivation results in Section 3. However,
it is a well known fact that outdoor channels, have a coherence bandwidth of about 250-500 KHz. Thus, while the channel demonstrates frequency-selective fading over large bandwidths, the narrowband channel over 125 KHz is relatively
flat [37]. Thus, interpolation of client and master base station
channel will give a reasonable estimate of their channel at
the guard band. Note that since the base stations are high
powered agents, they can indeed transmit constantly and will
have significantly larger transmit power than the clients. Thus,
with a dense enough deployment of base stations (expected
for LP-WANs [3, 6, 36]), the signal of the master base station
will be received at other base stations.
6 Separating Signal Paths
Given the wireless offset-free channels of the form h
conj
jk from
a client to a base station pair (j, k), we next seek to separate
the set of signal paths that signals traverse from the clients
to the n base stations. The key challenge in doing so is to
decouple the large number of signal paths using channel measurements from a small number of base stations. Fortunately,
our results in Sec. 10 as well as extensive past literature [50]
in outdoor urban wireless networks demonstrate that wireless
channels tend to have small number of dominant paths. As a
result, Chime exploits this sparsity to identify the dominant
signal paths using only a small number of available base stations. While there have been solutions proposed for WiFi [41]
and cellular networks [50], these techniques either model
certain behavior of signals in indoor environment or require
heavy infrastructure such as an array of antennas unavailable
at the base station. Furthermore, LP-WAN base stations are arranged irregularly, making it challenging to employ traditional
antenna array algorithms.
6.1 Irregular Distributed Arrays
Chime separates multiple signal paths by actively modeling
wireless signal characteristics of a distributed array of base
stations with an irregular, but known geometry. To do so,
Chime uses a maximum-likelihood [18] approach to identify
the best propagation characteristics that fit the observed channels. In particular, given that only a small number of signal
Figure 6: Virtual Sources: Reflected paths can be modeled
as virtual sources that are mirror images of the transmitter
paths dominate (Sec. 10.2), Chime iterates over a set of m
virtual source coordinates (xp, yp,zp) for p = 1,...,m, which
denote candidate locations for the client as well as one virtual
source for each dominant path from a reflecting surface. As
shown in Fig. 6, these virtual sources are simply the mirror
image of the source about any reflecting surface. One can then
compute the distances from these virtual sources to each base
station (whose coordinates are known) to compute the total
path length experienced by each reflected signal component.
Chime then uses this information to compute the optimal
attenuations and phase-shifts for each signal path that fit the
observed channels and the given geometry of virtual sources.
It then identifies and outputs the set of virtual sources, attenuations and phase shifts that best-fit the observed channels.
Key to Chime’s algorithm is an approach that both carefully
chooses the number of paths m and efficiently searches over
the space of virtual source coordinates.
Problem Formulation: Mathematically, Chime’s algorithm
begins by iterating over a set of candidate locations for the
virtual sources corresponding to a client. For ease of exposition, we make two simplifying assumptions which we will
relax later in this section: (1) Dominant reflectors are large,
therefore shared by all base stations; (2) Dominant reflectors are planar and infinite. We further only consider singlebounce reflectors and assume multi-bounce reflected paths
can be broken down into equivalent single-bounce reflectors. Let us assume for the moment that there are m such
sources with known coordinates: (xp, yp,zp) for p = 1,...,m.
Let us denote Bq to be the coordinates of the n base stations. Consider a signal along path p traversing a distance
of dp j = ||(xp, yp,zp)−Bj
|| to base station j from its virtual
source (xp, yp,zp). Then the phase of the channel from this
source is of the form −2π
dp j
λ
and magnitude 1
dp j
, where λ is
the signal wavelength [47]. Let h
con j
jk denote the offset-free
channels (see Sec. 5) received by each pair of base stations
(i, j). Recall that h
con j
jk contains the product of channels to
two base stations hC→Bj
h
∗
C→Bk
so the phases of each pair of
signal paths subtract and their magnitudes multiply. Hence,
h
con j
jk is a weighted sum of complex numbers whose phase is
of the form −2π
dp j−dqk
λ
and magnitude is of the form 1
dp jdqk
,
whose weights are unknown.
At this point, we formulate the following minimization
problem that attempts to find the complex weights, αp,q, based
on how well they fit the observed channels:
min
{αp,q}
ε






h
h
conj
jk i
1×n
2
−[αp,q]
1×m2 Em2×n
2





≤ ε
Em2×n
2 =

1
dp jdqk
e
−i2π
dp j−dqk
λ

p,q=1,...,m; j,k=1,...,n
where i =
√
−1. Given dp j’s and dqk’s, the above optimization problem can be solved in closed-form using a leastsquares fit as (note: (.)
pinv is pseudo-inverse.):
α
est =
h
h
conj
jk i
1×n
2
E
pinv
m2×n
2
(7)
At this point, we can estimate the goodness-of-fit of
the assumed coordinates of the virtual sources corresponding to the client {(xp, yp,zp)}p=1,...m based on how well
the estimated channels agree with the observed channels.
We define the goodness-of-fit of virtual source coordinates
{(xp, yp,zp)}p=1,...m as:
G({(xp, yp,zp)}p=1,...m) = 1/






h
h
conj
jk i
−α
estE






Thus, our problem of disentangling the multipath reduces to
finding the coordinates of virtual sources in a given geographical domain D, C
opt = {(x
opt
p , y
opt
p ,z
opt
p )}p=1,...,m as:
C
opt = arg max
{(xp,yp,zp)}p=1,...,m∈D}
G({(xp, yp,zp)}p=1,...,m)
Run-time Optimization: Running the above optimization
through an exhaustive grid search is prohibitive. Instead,
Chime solves it numerically using a stochastic gradient descent algorithm [25] that begins optimization at a few of initial
points (e.g. a coarse grid) in parallel. We then perform a finer
numerical gradient-based search at these points and report
the coordinates for which we obtain the global maximum of
goodness-of-fit. Also, prior information about the topography
of the deployment space, known reflectors, and location of
the transmitter, while not necessary, can speed up the search
process. Upon optimization, Chime can fully characterize the
m dominant taps by the virtual source coordinates C
opt and
corresponding phase shifts: α
opt =
h
h
conj
jk i
E
pinv
.
6.2 Designing Optimization Parameters
Channels are Sparse and Changing: Key to our optimization above is an accurate estimate of the number of dominant
signal paths m. Choosing a small number of signal paths
would lead to inefficiency and a poor overall goodness-of-fit
relative to the observed wireless channel. However, choosing
a large number of signal paths leads to over-fitting, or requires
large number of base stations, and eventually, a poor estimate
of the optimal frequency to operate on. Fortunately, our results in Sec. 10.2 demonstrate that the number of dominant
signal paths in practical outdoor settings is small, a median
of 2, beyond which we tend to over-fit. Furthermore, given a
number of base stations, estimating a certain number of dominant paths give the best results. We analyze this optimum
sparsity in Sec. 10.3 empirically and use the appropriate m
for performing the optimization. In Sec. 10.2 we show that
even though multipath is sparse, the dominant taps change
over the time-scale of minutes causing the optimal frequency
to change. Of course, most large reflectors (buildings) do not
move to cause this change. Hence, we surmise this is the
aggregate effect of one or more smaller static objects (e.g.
parked vehicles, objects close to the transmitter/receiver) that
move at these time scales.
Multiple, Non-Linear and Fleeting Reflectors: Note while
reflecting surfaces may be non-linear in the real world, in
our model, we only consider linear reflectors. We thus model
the multiple reflections off a non-linear reflector or multiple
reflectors as a composite linear reflector. Indeed, while this
assumption may sometimes lead to erroneous estimation of
reflectors [52] due to increased path length, we see that by
expanding the physical size of our search space for virtual
sources, the error in estimating multipath is minimal. We also
ran simulation based experiments which attempt to estimate
multiple reflections with a single reflector over a larger search
space (due to larger path distances). The results show that
error in finding the virtual source is negligible as long as the
peak is 7 dB above noise across the ISM band. Practically,
Chime only needs a source which exhibits similar distances
to the base stations as the different paths to the base stations.
We also ignore fleeting and small reflectors, which occur only
for one of the base stations, since they have minimal amortized effect across the received signals of the base stations.
Our results in Sec.10.3 show that these assumptions work
reasonably well for urban environments.
Finite Reflectors: Our approach above assumes infinite planar reflectors which is not true in real world. To encode the
finiteness of the reflectors we can introduce a new parameter
βp which is a boolean vector of length n to each virtual source
p where βp j=1 denotes whether the signal from virtual source
p reaches base station j. This means that
Em2×n
2 =

βp jβqk
dp jdqk
e
−i2π
dp j−dqk
λ

p,q=1,...,m; j,k=1,...,n
would be sufficient to model finite reflectors. However,
simply looking for all possible β is inefficient. Instead we add
two new parameters Φk and ψk which represent the starting
angle and spanning angle of the planar reflector. We can
reduce the possible β by imposing practical and geographical
constraints. This means we only have to optimize for 2m extra
parameters instead of nm. We can estimate the β matrix by
Figure 7: Chime’s algorithm in a nutshell
using the source locations{xk, yk,zk} and the angles Φk,ψk
and applying the correct constraints. This means that the
number of variables does not increase significantly and can
be modeled with additional base stations.
Mobility: While our solution does not consider mobility of
client, we believe even with the knowledge of location of the
client device, we cannot use the reflectors computed during
previous run of Chime to assist the next run. This is because
LP-WAN devices transmit very rarely (about every 15 minutes or more), which according to our observations in Sec. 3
demonstrate change in multipath of even static clients. This
will lead to a complete change in the reflectors of the client
device. Thus, under Chime’s constraints, we will indeed need
to recompute every reflector again.
Extending to Multiple Frequencies To recover the dominant signal paths using the algorithm above, one would need
to ensure that m < n, i.e. the number of dominant signal paths
is sparse and well below the number of base stations in the
vicinity of the LP-WAN client. We note that not all these base
stations need to be able to decode the client’s transmission at
the highest rate – they can simply compute wireless channels
from the preamble. However, in the instance that too few base
stations are available in the vicinity of the client, Chime can
improve its performance by measuring wireless channels at
more frequency bands, e.g. by requesting the client to hop
across a few bands. In effect, the additional measurements
across base stations makes sure our optimization in Eqn. 7 is
not under-determined.
7 Estimating Optimal Frequency
Having disentangled the multiple signal paths emerging from
the client, Chime can estimate an optimal frequency of operation by recombining these signal paths across the various
available transmission frequencies. It can then identify the
operating frequency by choosing the transmission frequency
with the highest signal power, while also accounting for other
factors such as noise and interference.
Computing Signal Power The first step to selecting the
best operating frequency is to determine the signal power
at each frequency band. In particular, given the offset-free
channels h
conj
jk between a pair of base stations (j, k) from
Sec. 5 and the multipath propagation characteristics ({αp,q}
and {(xp, yp,zp)}) from Sec. 6, we write the offset-free channel h
conj
jk,@f
at any frequency f and wavelength λf as:
h
conj
jk,@f = [αp,q]
1×m2 E , where:
E =
"
1
dp jdqk
e
−i2π
dp j−dqk
λ f
#
p,q=1,...,m; j,k=1,...,n
Here, d denotes the distances between virtual sources and
base stations as defined in Sec. 6.
Notice that the magnitude of |h
conj
jk,@f
|
2
is simply the product
of the signal power from the client at base station i and base
station j. However, Chime needs to recover the individual
power of the wireless channels at each frequency to compare
them across frequencies. Extracting these individual powers
from h
conj
jk,@f
is challenging, because its phase was carefully
constructed to remove any hardware impediments.
Chime addresses this challenge by performing its algorithm
in Sec. 6 on a second set of input wireless channels. We define
these wireless channels, h
rat
jk as:
h
rat
jk =
h˜
C→Bk
(t)h˜
BM→Bj
(t)hBM→Bk
h˜
C→Bj
(t)h˜
BM→Bk
(t)hBM→Bj
Notice that the phase of h
rat
jk is identical to that of h
conj
jk ,
and is therefore also free from phase errors due to hardware
impediments of LP-WAN radios. Its magnitude however is
different – the ratio of the magnitude of the wireless channels to each base stations. One can therefore apply Chime’s
algorithm (Sec. 6) with h
rat
jk instead of h
conj
jk as input and obtain
as output the corresponding wireless channel at frequency f :
h
rat
jk,@f
. It is then easy to see that the power of the signal from
the client to base stations j and k on frequency f is:
|hC→Bj
,@f
|
2 = h
conj
jk,@f
/h
rat
jk,@f
(8)
|hC→Bk
,@f
|
2 = (h
conj
jk,@f
)
∗
h
rat
jk,@f
(9)
Selecting Optimal Radio Configuration Beyond signal
power at the target frequency that Chime computes, data rate is
also influenced by ambient noise, interference and attenuation
introduced by the transmit/receive chains across frequencies.
Fortunately, LP-WAN base stations can easily measure all
these quantities as they span a wide band of frequencies [31].
Chime therefore uses these measurements to compute the
effective SINR of the client across frequencies to choose the
one best optimizing its battery life.
8 Extensions of Chime
While Chime is designed to compute an optimal frequency
for an LP-WAN client to conserve battery-life, its approach
can be used to complement related problems in LP-WAN:
Coherent Combining: In addition to magnitude, recall that
Chime also provides the relative phase of wireless channels
between base stations. This is useful in computing the expected wireless channels when the base stations collaborate
to coherently combine the received signal across base stations
in order to decode them (e.g. Charm [17] performs coherent
combining in the LP-WAN context to decode weak transmissions from clients). By knowing both the magnitude and
relative phase of wireless channels at each base station across
frequencies, Chime can identify the frequency-band for which
the expected power of the coherently combined signal will
be maximum. Hence, Chime improves the performance of
coherent combining in LP-WANs (Sec. 10.5).
Finding Nulls: Just as Chime can find the radio configuration where a client’s signal power to any base station is
maximum, it can also find frequency where signal power is
minimum. This is valuable in nulling interference from an
unwanted client at a base station by requesting it to transmit
at a frequency where interference is lower with one or more
base stations. Sec. 10.6 presents results evaluating Chime’s
performance in finding nulls from a client to base station.
9 Implementation and Evaluation
We implement Chime on Ettus USRP N210s as base stations and reference transmitter for removing phase offsets
(see Sec. 5).These base stations measure phase based on
our customized code in UHD to measure phase for Chirp
Spread Spectrum modulated data at line rate. We use Semtech
SX1276 chips as LoRaWAN client transmitters. Each picks a
single frequency from the ones supported by the transmitter
and transmits a small “chirp" for the base stations to hear. The
master base station (USRP N210) is designed to transmit on
an adjacent band all the time for convenience of implementation(see Sec. 5.2). We set the client spreading factor to 10 bits
per symbol and the bandwidth to 125KHz (standard mode of
operation). Each base station has a reliable link to the cloud
via a wired backend. Chime’s code is implemented in MATLAB/C++ using an in-house UHD-compatible LoRaWAN
demodulator and processes the received wireless channels
across base stations at the cloud. We only consider infinite
length reflectors to evaluate our system. Note that we perform
coherent combining across base stations only for Sec. 10.5
where we combine Charm with Chime.
Wide-Area Deployment: Unless specified otherwise, we
evaluate Chime over four months across CMU campus and
surrounding neighborhoods spanning an area of 0.5km ×
0.7km in Pittsburgh leading to complex multipath scenarios
as shown in Fig. 8. Our deployment consists of 11 LP-WAN
Figure 8: Chime Deployment: Red
circles denote base station locations
Figure 9: Phase Stability: Phase of
offset-free channel hconj
jk in multipathrich scenarios is stable across SINRs
Figure 10: Multipath Sparsity: Histogram of # dominant paths shows sparsity
of multipath in urban environment
base stations serving different areas, all placed in different
buildings – 5 indoors and 6 outdoors. The campus has a variety of tall buildings, trees, other large occlusions and hilly
terrain. Our frequencies of operation include the 915 MHz
ISM band and some bands in 500 MHz TV white spaces (FCC
experimental hardware license). We deploy up to 30 static
LoRaWAN clients at various locations (changing every few
days) to collect thousands of wireless channel traces across
distances relative to the base stations. While each client is not
mobile, we do consider a dynamic environment. Each client
transmits at a rate of 5-15 packets per hour. Further, clients
chose an arbitrary frequency of operation for their initial association packet. Note that our experiments in Sec. 10.2 are
in a 0.36 km2 downtown area of Pittsburgh to study multipath
(described further in Sec. 10.2).
Ground Truth & Baseline: We obtain ground truth by making clients hop on all frequencies to find an optimal one.
However, only the wireless channel corresponding to a single
packet on one frequency band is provided to Chime, unless
stated otherwise. We compare Chime against three baseline
systems: (1) Standard LoRaWAN which chooses initial frequency arbitrarily; (2) Interpolation across frequency (as described in Sec. 3), when data across multiple frequencies is
available; (3) Charm, a system that performs coherent combining across base stations [17].
Runtime: Our current implementation takes ∼ 31 sec to explore the search space of reflectors on a desktop with Core-i7
8700K and Nvidia GTX 1060 GPU with 64 GB RAM where
E matrices are prefetched in memory for search space of virtual sources. This could be significantly optimized with prior
knowledge of the reflectors (topography) or parallelization on
a GPU cluster – a task for future work.
10 Experimental Results
10.1 Stability of Phase
Setup: An LP-WAN transmitter is moved across 25 locations
in our wide-area testbed and multiple traces are collected
from base stations spread across 4 months for static clients.
We remove the phase offsets and plot the mean and standard
deviation of the instability (standard deviation) in the phase
of the offset-free channel (Sec. 5) across pairs of base stations
for various SINRs.
Results: Fig. 9 shows the phase measurements of the offsetfree channel are stable across pairs of base stations with a
mean standard deviation of less than 5×10−3
even at SINRs
as low as -21 dB. This validates the stability in measurement
of the phase of offset-free channels at low SINRs.
10.2 Multipath in Urban Environments
We next study the multipath in the downtown of a large city
in the U.S. to validate the sparsity assumption in Sec. 6.1.
Setup: We have a base station transmit wide band chirps of
20 MHz moved over a path length of 5 km in a urban downtown environment. Another base station is used to receive
these signals. We then collect data from over 600 different
GPS-tagged locations over 0.36 km2
. We correlate with transmitted chirp to estimate the number of taps in the signal. We
also keep a transmitter-receiver pair 600 m away in a NLOS
suburban environment to evaluate the change in sparsity of
multipath and the associated channels over time.3
Results: Fig. 10 shows that almost 77% of locations have
less than 3 dominant taps in the wireless channel affecting
the signal, showing the channel is predominantly sparse as
we assume. We also note that at least one of these dominant
taps change over time scales of a few minutes, even for static
clients. We surmise this is due to some smaller static reflectors
in the environment moving gradually over time in aggregate
leading to a small number of gradually moving taps. Fig. 11
shows how long the paths between the client and the base
station typically are stable. We define persistence of a path
as the time until which atleast 80% of the energy received
remains within the original path components. We see that with
90% likelihood the sparse multipath changes within 10 mins.
If we ignore the most dominant path, we see that secondary
reflectors change even faster.
3Our data and code are available at [1].
Figure 11: Path Persistence:
Sparse multipath is unstable across
minutes
Figure 12: SINR Goodness-ofFit: CDF of predicted vs. actual
SINR across base stations
Figure 13: (Left) Gain in SINR(dB) by using Chime vs.
median frequency of operation; (Right) Battery life of
Chime vs. temporal interpolation technique
10.3 Chime’s Gains across Base Stations
We demonstrate the gains achieved by using Chime for identifying an optimal frequency of operation.
Setup: We collect 20 measurements of 100 packets each,
spread across 3 months from 5 locations across campus at
six base stations at a given frequency fi
. Using these packets, we compute the offset-free channel for each of the base
station pairs. We then apply Chime’s algorithm to compute
an optimal frequency-of-operation. We compute the gain (in
dB) as the improvement of SINR at the computed operation
frequency vs. the median SINR across all possible frequencies. Finally, we measure the improvement in the battery
life of LP-WAN transmitters due to lower transmission time
by using Chime as the percentage of maximum battery life
achievable by choosing the optimum frequency of operation.
The results are averaged over choice of initial frequency.
Sparsity: As we increase the number of base stations,
more and more complex multipath patterns emerge. This
is to be expected, given that more base stations are influenced by a larger number of reflectors. This means that 2
multipath sources are not enough to correctly estimate the
complex multipath patterns and hence more multipath sources
are required to assess the optimum frequency of operation.
# Base Optimal
stations Sparsity
4 2 sources
5 3 sources
6 4 sources
This can usually be rectified by
adding more variables (estimating
more sources) which can result in
a better fit for the equations. The
table shows the median optimum
sparsity vs. # base stations:
SINR Prediction: Next, we measure how accurately
Chime predicts the accurate SINR of the optimal frequency
of operation, across the 915 MHz ISM band. Specifically, we
compute the CDF of the difference in SINR between the predicted and actual SINR at the optimal frequency of operation.
Fig. 12 plots the results across number of base stations with
only 2.7 dB of difference (median) with 6 base stations and 4
multipath(MP) sources considered. To put this in perspective,
the SINR at an arbitrary frequency would differ from the optimal by as much as 6.1 dB (median). Our results once again
validate Chime’s sparsity assumptions and our modeling approach. It shows that the gap between the association packet
and transmission (∼10-15 ms) is too short for environmental
dynamism to change the channels for static clients.
SINR Gain: Next we analyze the gain in SINR achieved by
Chime with increasing number of base stations. Our baseline
for the gain is the median frequency-of-operation which emulates choosing an operation frequency at random. As shown
in Fig. 13, we achieve a gain of about 2.4 dB with 4 base
stations which increases as we increase the number of base
stations (with optimum sparsity). With 6 base stations, we
achieve a mean increase in the SINR of about 3.4 dB.
Battery Life Gain: Finally, we compare the battery life4
achieved by Chime with that of choosing frequency of operation based on temporal interpolation. As shown in Fig. 13,
we see a stark improvement of 107% in the battery life using
Chime which provides a mean of 79% of the optimum over
the baseline approaches. This result shows that Chime can
provide high gains for dense urban deployments.
These gains in signal power allow transmitters to send at
faster rates and reducing the transmission time of the LPWAN clients. We use methodology explained in Sec. 3 to
estimate the expected battery life of the client when streaming
sensed data at the optimal data rate to the base station. As
shown in Fig. 14, we see a 230% increase in the battery life
of the LP-WAN transmitters over the median frequency of
operation which is significant for rarely transmitting devices
whose lifetime increases from 2.5 years to 8.2 years.
10.4 Chime’s Gains across Frequency
We study the gain in SINR and improvement in data rate that
can be obtained by sampling more frequencies to further help
the base stations to find an optimal frequency using Sec. 6.2.
Setup: We collect phases from 6 receiver base stations at
frequencies ranging from 902-928 MHz with an interval of
500 kHz. The frequencies chosen in each case for training
are randomized to ensure correctness and the gains obtained
in each case are averaged across 5 client locations across
4Battery Life estimates derived from prior energy models (see Sec.3)
Figure 14: Gain in battery life
across # messages per hour:
Battery life increases 1.4-5.7
years for LP-WAN clients
Figure 15: Gain in SINR and
improvement in datarate vs.
interpolation for # of frequencies used for training
Figure 16: Chime +
Charm: Improvement in
Gain(dB) when Charm is
assisted by Chime
Figure 17: Nulling of
unwanted interference
leads to improved data
rate for legitimate client
with Chime
multiple weeks. We compute the improvement in data rates
achieved due to higher signal strength. As we are sampling
multiple frequencies, our baseline will be the spectral interpolation using these frequencies (as described in Sec. 3).
Results: We observe a steady increase in gain with increasing number of frequencies used for training which improves
battery-life. The improvement is significantly more than that
of the baseline. An important side-benefit of Chime is the
improvement in data rate which also progressively increases.
As the SINR of the received signal improves, it enables clients
to transmit at faster data rates. While LP-WAN clients are
infrequent and low-rate transmitters, this improves overall
spectrum utilization in congested large-scale deployments.
10.5 Chime with Coherent Combining
In this experiment, we measure Chime’s performance in improving Charm’s [17] capability of coherent combining.
Setup: We perform the same experiment as Sec. 10.3. However, to compute the frequency-of-operation, we optimize for
the sum of the SINR at the base stations instead of an individual base station. Then, we coherently combine the signals
at that frequency as shown in [17]. The base line is näive
Charm [17] which chooses a frequency randomly.
Results: Fig. 16 shows a median SINR increase of 4.5 dB
with six base stations which can significantly improve the
battery life of LP-WAN clients in urban environments. As expected, the improvement is much better than that by choosing
a random frequency of operation by about 2.5-3 dB.
10.6 Can Chime Null Interference?
This section predicts nulls, i.e. a bad frequency of transmission for an interfering client to a given base station to provide
improvement in signal strength of legitimate client.
Setup: We perform the same experiment as Sec. 10.3. We
measure the reduction in interference by using Chime to correctly estimate the frequency with the worst channel estimate.
We compute the reduction in Interference to Noise Ratio
(INR) for a legitimate client in another channel. We measure
the resulting gains in data-rate for the legitimate transmitter
due to reduction in interference by the interferer.
Results: Fig. 17 shows that we can achieve up to 2.8× gain
in the data rates of the legitimate transmitter by allocating
the interferer a null frequency. We further show that as we increase the number of base stations, the accuracy of estimating
nulls increases which shows that we can get better and better
gains for the legitimate transmitter.
11 Conclusion and Future Work
This paper presents Chime, a system that allows an LP-WAN
client to choose its optimal frequency simply by sending a
single packet on one frequency band. Chime achieves this
by analyzing the paths signals traverse from the client to distributed and coordinated base stations. Chime was evaluated
in a campus-scale testbed, leading to a median battery life
increase of 1.4-5.7 years over commodity LP-WANs.
While Chime’s emphasis is on optimal frequency, we believe it provides the building blocks for a comprehensive
interference management and distributed MIMO system built
for LP-WANs. Designing such an end-to-end system to provide enormous battery savings to low-power clients, while
respecting their hardware limitations remains an important
problem for future work.
Acknowledgments
This work was supported by Kavciˇ c-Moura award and National Science Foun- ´
dation grants 1823235, 1718435 and 1837607. We extend warm gratitude to
Prof. Srinivasa Narasimhan, Angy Malloy and Robotics Institute at CMU for
allowing us to setup remote base stations for wide-scale deployment. Finally,
the authors would like to thank our shepherd Lin Zhong, anonymous NSDI
reviewers, Vyas Sekar, Peter Steenkiste, Atulya, Adhishree and members of
WiSe and WiTech lab for their constructive feedback and support.
References
[1] Chime Code and Link to Data. https://github.com/AkshayGadre/
ChimeNSDI2020/, accessed Aug 23, 2019.
[2] LoRaWAN – What is it? A Technical Overview of LoRa
and LoRaWAN. https://www.lora-alliance.org/portals/0/
documents/whitepapers/LoRaWAN101.pdf, accessed Jan 10, 2019.
[3] LoRaWAN Capacity Trial In Dense Urban Environment.
https://www.smart-city-solutions.de/wp-content/
uploads/2018/04/machineQ_LoRaWan_Capacity_Trial.pdf,
accessed Jan 10, 2019.
[4] Semtech SX1276 datasheet. https://www.semtech.com/uploads/
documents/DS_SX1276-7-8-9_W_APP_V5.pdf, accessed Jun 15,
2018.
[5] Long Term Evolution for Machines:
LTE-M. https://www.gsma.com/iot/
long-term-evolution-machine-type-communication-lte-mtc-cat-m1/,
accessed Mar 3, 2018.
[6] Ferran Adelantado, Xavier Vilajosana, Pere Tuset-Peiro, Borja Martinez, Joan Melia-Segui, and Thomas Watteyne. Understanding the
limits of LoRaWAN. IEEE Communications magazine, 55(9):34–40,
2017.
[7] Emekcan Aras, Nicolas Small, Gowri Sankar Ramachandran, Stéphane
Delbruel, Wouter Joosen, and Danny Hughes. Selective jamming of
LoRaWAN using commodity hardware. In EAI International Conference on Mobile and Ubiquitous Systems: Computing, Networking and
Services, pages 363–372, 2017.
[8] Waheed U Bajwa, Jarvis Haupt, Akbar M Sayeed, and Robert Nowak.
Compressed channel sensing: A new approach to estimating sparse
multipath channels. Proceedings of the IEEE, 98(6):1058–1076, 2010.
[9] A Canavitsas, LAR Silva Mello, and M Grivet. White space prediction
technique for cognitive radio applications. In IEEE Microwave &
Optoelectronics Conference (IMOC), pages 1–5, 2013.
[10] Marco Centenaro, Lorenzo Vangelista, Andrea Zanella, and Michele
Zorzi. Long-range communications in unlicensed bands: The rising
stars in the IoT and smart city scenarios. IEEE Wireless Communications, 23(5):60–67, 2016.
[11] Gerard G Cervello, Sunghyun Choi, Stefan Mangold, and Amjad Ali
Soomro. Dynamic channel selection scheme for IEEE 802.11 WLANs,
January 10 2006. US Patent 6,985,465.
[12] H. Chen, L. Liu, T. Novlan, J. D. Matyjas, B. L. Ng, and J. Zhang. Spatial spectrum sensing-based device-to-device cellular networks. IEEE
Transactions on Wireless Communications, 15(11):7299–7313, Nov
2016.
[13] Min Chen, Yiming Miao, Yixue Hao, and Kai Hwang. Narrow band
internet of things. IEEE Access, 5:20557–20577, 2017.
[14] W. Cheng, X. Zhang, and H. Zhang. Full-Duplex Spectrum-Sensing
and MAC-Protocol for Multichannel Nontime-Slotted Cognitive Radio Networks. IEEE Journal on Selected Areas in Communications,
33(5):820–831, May 2015.
[15] Junil Choi, David J Love, and Patrick Bidigare. Downlink training
techniques for FDD massive MIMO systems: Open-loop and closedloop training with memory. IEEE Journal of Selected Topics in Signal
Processing, 8(5):802–814, 2014.
[16] Federal Communications Commission. FCC Adopts
Rules for Unlicensed Use of Television White Spaces.
https://www.fcc.gov/document/fcc-adopts-rules-unlicensed-usetelevision-white-spaces, 2008.
[17] Adwait Dongare, Revathy Narayanan, Akshay Gadre, Anh Luong, Artur
Balanuta, Swarun Kumar, Bob Iannucci, and Anthony Rowe. Charm:
Exploiting geographical diversity through coherent combining in Lowpower Wide-area Networks. In ACM/IEEE International Conference
on Information Processing in Sensor Networks (IPSN), pages 60–71,
2018.
[18] Zheng Du, Xuegui Song, Julian Cheng, and Norman C Beaulieu. Maximum likelihood based channel estimation for macrocellular OFDM
uplinks in dispersive time-varying channels. IEEE Transactions on
Wireless Communications, 10(1):176–187, 2011.
[19] Rashad Eletreby, Diana Zhang, Swarun Kumar, and Osman Yagan. ˘
Empowering Low-Power Wide Area Networks in Urban Settings. In
ACM Special Interest Group on Data Communication (SIGCOMM),
pages 309–321, 2017.
[20] FCC. Second Report and Order and Memorandum Opinion and Order.
Tech. Rep., 2010.
[21] Jose A Gutierrez, Marco Naeve, Ed Callaway, Monique Bourgeois,
Vinay Mitter, and Bob Heile. IEEE 802.15 4: a developing standard for
low-power low-cost wireless personal area networks. IEEE network,
15(5):12–19, 2001.
[22] Ezzeldin Hamed, Hariharan Rahul, Mohammed A Abdelghany, and
Dina Katabi. Real-time distributed MIMO systems. In ACM Special
Interest Group on Data Communication (SIGCOMM), pages 412–425,
2016.
[23] Mehrdad Hessar, Ali Najafi, and Shyamnath Gollakota. Netscatter:
Enabling large-scale backscatter networks. In USENIX Symposium on
Networked Systems Design and Implementation (NSDI 19), 2019.
[24] Hyoil Kim and Kang G Shin. Efficient discovery of spectrum opportunities with MAC-layer sensing in cognitive radio networks. IEEE
transactions on mobile computing, 7(5):533–545, 2008.
[25] Diederik P Kingma and Jimmy Ba. Adam: A method for stochastic
optimization. arXiv preprint arXiv:1412.6980, 2014.
[26] Manikanta Kotaru, Kiran Joshi, Dinesh Bharadia, and Sachin Katti.
Spotfi: Decimeter level localization using wifi. In ACM SIGCOMM
Computer Communication Review, volume 45, pages 269–282, 2015.
[27] Jansen C Liando, Amalinda Gamage, Agustinus W Tengourtius, and
Mo Li. Known and Unknown Facts of LoRa: Experiences from a Largescale Measurement Study. ACM Transactions on Sensor Networks
(TOSN), 15(2):16, 2019.
[28] Rúben Oliveira, Lucas Guardalben, and Susana Sargento. Long range
communications in urban and rural environments. In IEEE Symposium
on Computers and Communications (ISCC), pages 810–817, 2017.
[29] Chunyi Peng, Haitao Zheng, and Ben Y. Zhao. Utilization and fairness
in spectrum assignment for opportunistic spectrum access. Mobile
Networks Applications, 11(4):555–576, August 2006.
[30] Yao Peng, Longfei Shangguan, Yue Hu, Yujie Qian, Xianshang Lin,
Xiaojiang Chen, Dingyi Fang, and Kyle Jamieson. PLoRa: Passive
Long-Range Data Networks from Ambient LoRa Transmissions. ACM
Special Interest Group on Data Communication(SIGCOMM), 2018.
[31] Tara Petric, Mathieu Goessens, Loutfi Nuaymi, Laurent Toutain, and ´
Alexander Pelov. Measurements, performance and analysis of LoRa
FABIAN, a real-world implementation of LPWAN. In IEEE International Symposium on Personal, Indoor, and Mobile Radio Communications (PIMRC), pages 1–7, 2016.
[32] R. Grech. Semtech and Comcast’s machineQ
Announce LoRaWAN Network Availability in 10
Cities. https://www.semtech.com/company/press/
semtech-and-comcasts-machineq-announce-lorawan-network-availability-in-10-cities,
2018.
[33] Hariharan Rahul, Swarun Kumar, and Dina Katabi. MegaMIMO: Scaling Wireless Capacity with User Demands. In ACM Special Interest
Group on Data Communication (SIGCOMM), August 2012.
[34] Xiongbin Rao and Vincent KN Lau. Distributed compressive CSIT
estimation and feedback for FDD multi-user massive MIMO systems.
IEEE Transactions on Signal Processing, 62(12):3261–3271, 2014.
[35] Rapeepat Ratasuk, Benny Vejlgaard, Nitin Mangalvedhe, and Amitava
Ghosh. NB-IoT system for M2M communication. In IEEE Wireless
Communications and Networking Conference (WCNC), pages 1–5,
2016.
[36] S. Marek. Comcast Will Test LoRaWAN IoT Networks in Two
Markets. https://www.sdxcentral.com/articles/news/
comcast-will-test-lora-iot-network-two-markets/2016/
10/, 2016.
[37] Jaroslaw Sadowski. Measurement of coherence bandwidth in uhf radio
channels for narrowband networks. International Journal of Antennas
and Propagation, 2015, 2015.
[38] Shweta Sagari, Samuel Baysting, Dola Saha, Ivan Seskar, Wade Trappe,
and Dipankar Raychaudhuri. Coordinated dynamic spectrum management of LTE-U and Wi-Fi networks. In IEEE International Symposium
on Dynamic Spectrum Access Networks (DySPAN), pages 209–220,
2015.
[39] Ramon Sanchez-Iborra and Maria-Dolores Cano. State of the Art in
LP-WAN Solutions for Industrial IoT Services. Sensors, 16(5):708,
2016.
[40] Mamoru Sawahashi, Yoshihisa Kishiyama, Akihito Morimoto, Daisuke
Nishikawa, and Motohiro Tanno. Coordinated multipoint transmission/reception techniques for LTE-advanced [Coordinated and Distributed MIMO]. IEEE Wireless Communications, 17(3), 2010.
[41] Souvik Sen, Bozidar Radunovic, Jeongkeun Lee, and Kyu-Han Kim.
CSpy: finding the best quality channel without probing. In ACM International Conference on Mobile Computing & Networking (MobiCom),
pages 267–278, 2013.
[42] C Shepard, H Yu, N Anand, L Li, T Marzetta, YR Yang, and L Zhong.
Argos: Practical base stations with large-scale multi-user beamforming.
ACM International Conference on Mobile Computing and Networking
(MobiCom), pages 53–64, 2012.
[43] Min Soo Sim, Jeonghun Park, Chan-Byoung Chae, and Robert W Heath.
Compressed channel feedback for correlated massive MIMO systems.
Journal of Communications and Networks, 18(1):95–104, 2016.
[44] N. Sornin, M. Luis, T. Eirich, T. Kramp, and O. Hersent. LoRaWAN
Specification. pages 1–82, 2015.
[45] Vamsi Talla, Mehrdad Hessar, Bryce Kellogg, Ali Najafi, Joshua R
Smith, and Shyamnath Gollakota. LoRa backscatter: Enabling the vision of ubiquitous connectivity. Proceedings of the ACM on Interactive,
Mobile, Wearable and Ubiquitous Technologies (IMWUT), 1(3):105,
2017.
[46] Lei Tang, Yanjun Sun, Omer Gurewitz, and David B. Johnson. EMMAC: A Dynamic Multichannel Energy-efficient MAC Protocol for
Wireless Sensor Networks. In ACM International Symposium on Mobile Ad Hoc Networking and Computing (MobiHoc). ACM, 2011.
[47] David Tse and Pramod Viswanath. Fundamentals of wireless communication. Cambridge university press, 2005.
[48] Deepak Vasisht, Zerina Kapetanovic, Jongho Won, Xinxin Jin, Ranveer
Chandra, Sudipta N Sinha, Ashish Kapoor, Madhusudhan Sudarshan,
and Sean Stratman. FarmBeats: An IoT Platform for Data-Driven
Agriculture. In USENIX Symposium on Networked Systems Design
and Implementation (NSDI), pages 515–529, 2017.
[49] Deepak Vasisht, Swarun Kumar, and Dina Katabi. Decimeter-level
localization with a single wifi access point. In USENIX Symposium on
Networked Systems Design and Implementation (NSDI), volume 16,
pages 165–178, 2016.
[50] Deepak Vasisht, Swarun Kumar, Hariharan Rahul, and Dina Katabi.
Eliminating channel feedback in next-generation cellular networks. In
ACM Special Interest Group on Data Communication (SIGCOMM),
pages 398–411, 2016.
[51] Y-P Eric Wang, Xingqin Lin, Ansuman Adhikary, Asbjorn Grovlen,
Yutao Sui, Yufei Blankenship, Johan Bergman, and Hazhir S Razaghi. A
primer on 3GPP narrowband Internet of Things. IEEE Communications
Magazine, 55(3):117–123, 2017.
[52] Teng Wei, Anfu Zhou, and Xinyu Zhang. Facilitating robust 60 GHz
network deployment by sensing ambient reflectors. In USENIX Symposium on Networked Systems Design and Implementation (NSDI), pages
213–226, 2017.
[53] Yaxiong Xie, Zhenjiang Li, and Mo Li. Precise Power Delay Profiling
with Commodity WiFi. In ACM International Conference on Mobile
Computing and Networking (MobiCom), pages 53–64, 2015.
[54] Jie Xiong and Kyle Jamieson. Arraytrack: A fine-grained indoor location system. In USENIX Symposium on Networked Systems Design
and Implementation (NSDI), pages 71–84, 2013.
[55] Yi Xu, Guosen Yue, and Shiwen Mao. User grouping for massive
MIMO in FDD systems: New design methods and analysis. IEEE
Access, 2:947–959, 2014.
[56] Tevfik Yucek and Huseyin Arslan. A survey of spectrum sensing
algorithms for cognitive radio applications. IEEE communications
surveys & tutorials, 11(1):116–130, 2009.
[57] Y. Zeng and Y. C. Liang. Eigenvalue-based spectrum sensing algorithms for cognitive radio. IEEE Transactions on Communications,
57(6):1784–1793, June 2009.
[58] Per Zetterberg. Experimental investigation of tdd reciprocity-based
zero-forcing transmit precoding. EURASIP Journal on Advances in
Signal Processing, 2011(1):137541, 2011.
[59] D. Zhang, Z. Chen, J. Ren, N. Zhang, M. K. Awad, H. Zhou, and X. S.
Shen. Energy-Harvesting-Aided Spectrum Sensing and Data Transmission in Heterogeneous Cognitive Radio Sensor Network. IEEE
Transactions on Vehicular Technology, 66(1):831–843, Jan 2017.
[60] Tan Zhang, Ning Leng, and Suman Banerjee. A vehicle-based measurement framework for enhancing whitespace spectrum databases. In
ACM International Conference on Mobile Computing and Networking
(MobiCom), pages 17–28, 2014.
[61] JC Zuniga and B Ponsard. Sigfox System Description. LPWAN IETF97,
Nov. 14th, 2016.